chore: introduce governance board (#1634)
asyncapi/community: GOVERNANCE.md

## Governance Board (GB) members

> You can determine who is the current GB member from [MAINTAINERS.yaml](MAINTAINERS.yaml) and [AMBASSADORS_MEMBERS.json](AMBASSADORS_MEMBERS.json), `isBoardMember` and `isBoardChair` properties. We also transparently list all the GB members in [AsyncAPI Website](`https://asyncapi.com/community/board`)

Author: of course https://asyncapi.com/community/board to be implemented once we agree with the PR shape and conclude a vote in future

> You can determine who is the current GB member from [MAINTAINERS.yaml](MAINTAINERS.yaml) and [AMBASSADORS_MEMBERS.json](AMBASSADORS_MEMBERS.json), `isBoardMember` and `isBoardChair` properties. We also transparently list all the GB members in [AsyncAPI Website](`https://asyncapi.com/community/board`)

Reviewer: I'm suggesting a rephrase for clarity and also that we don't rely on `isBoardChair` to know if someone is a Board member or not. IMHO, the chairperson should have both properties set to true.

```suggestion
You can determine who are the current GB members by filtering the [maintainers](MAINTAINERS.yaml) and the [ambassadors](AMBASSADORS_MEMBERS.json) with the ìsBoardMember` set to `true`. We also transparently list all the GB members in [AsyncAPI Website](`https://asyncapi.com/community/board`)
```

> To become GB member you need to be a member of Technical Steering Committee (TSC). To become a member of TSC, you need to be either Ambassador or Maintainer. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To become a GB member, you need to be a member of Technical Steering Committee (TSC). To become a member of TSC, you need to be either Ambassador or Maintainer. 
```

> ### Election

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Election or the Governance Board
```

Reviewer: LOL, sorry, I meant "of".

```suggestion
### Election of the Governance Board
```

> Election takes place every 12-months. First time 3 board members are elected, then after 12-months another 2 members are elected. Then again, since board members are elected for 24-months, we run election to reelect or pick new board members, and so on.

Reviewer 2: I'm so confused here, why are we having elections every 12 months? For board members to serve for 2 years ?

Reviewer 2: So is it like this: first 3 members elected the after one year 2 additional members are elected making it 5.

So the following year we have again the GB election, so the 2 members who joined late what happens to them as they only served 12 months?

Author: please have a look at https://github.com/asyncapi/community/pull/1634/files#r1912986986

is this text better?

> Election takes place every 12-months. First time 3 board members are elected, then after 12-months another 2 members are elected. Then again, since board members are elected for 24-months, we run election to reelect or pick new board members, and so on.

Reviewer: This is not clear to me 🤔 I get the first part but the "and so on" got me lost. Does it mean that after 2 years, we'll have 3 GB members again and then 12 months later we'll have 5 GB members? 😕

Reviewer: Yeah, that's much better, thanks!

> - Minimum 60 days before elections, GB must ask community for candidates.

Reviewer: How should the GB ask the community? I think we should clarify this. Through a GitHub discussion, email in the newsletter, and a post in our social profiles? Since this is important, I think we should make some noise, right?

Reviewer: Yeah, that's how we do it today. I just want to make sure that rules say "we **have to** do it". We have to publish it in all the channels.

- People can also submit their application on their own. 

> - Information about candidate must be sent to info@asyncapi.io not later than 30 days before elections.

Reviewer: It's fine for now but I think we should get an asyncapi.com or asyncapi.org email because asyncapi.io is mine and not part of LF 😄

- Nominee must agree to be nominated.
- List of candidates must be published at least on AsyncAPI Website not later than 2 weeks before elections.

> - Concerns about candidates should be reported to Code of Conduct Committee. 

Reviewer: What if the people in the Code of Conduct Committee are candidates and someone has concerns with them? Should we veto Code of Conduct Committee members to become GB members? Or that they should announce it some time before these 60 days described above so that we can find other people to replace them?

Reviewer 3: There is a mechanism for solving the possible conflict of interest that may apply here if I see this correctly

https://github.com/asyncapi/community/blob/master/code_of_conduct/coc-incident-resolution-procedures.md#procedures-when-a-hard-conflict-of-interest-exists

Reviewer: That works when there's a conflict with a subset of the committee but not if the whole CoC committee is part of the GB. I know I know, it's just my programmer's mindset. The likelihood of this happening is close to zero 😅

- Manage AsyncAPI Initiative employees and hiring process.
- Guarantee everyone who needs it (and has the right to) has access to the services AsyncAPI uses.
- Make sure that regularly sucessions of the GB are done through a transparent voting process.
- Takes care of the funding management, e.g., Open Collective, Github Sponsors, etc.
- Must be a servant leader and has no power other than the specified in the [charter](./CHARTER.md). Everything that is proposed should be voted by the TSC.

Please note that the list above is not an exhaustive list and should not be treated as a legal document but just for reference.

## Technical Steering Committee (TSC) members

You can determine who is TSC member and has right to vote from [MAINTAINERS.yaml](MAINTAINERS.yaml) and [AMBASSADORS_MEMBERS.json](AMBASSADORS_MEMBERS.json), `isTSCMember` properties. We also transparently list all the TSC members in [AsyncAPI Website](`https://asyncapi.com/community/tsc`).

Any maintainer and any ambassador can change their status by editing `isTSCMember` properties.

## Voting

TSC Voting process and all related rules are describe in detail in [voting procedure document](voting.md).

> GB election voting is a separate manual process run by current GB members:

Author: this is the most complex part for me as we never did such board elections

implementing any tool for it do not make sense for me upfront. I checked Apache Foundation but their elections are super complex. I'd love to hear opinions on why https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First-past-the-post_voting would not work, and what is better - and still easy to explain

Reviewer 4: [Democracy is mathematically impossible](https://youtu.be/qf7ws2DF-zk) 😜

But on a serious note should there be a position who keeps track of the Voting?

Author: not sure, the board is not that big really, so they can collectively be responsible for it, I don't think they need any specific role in the board to do that

Author: cool video btw
first past the post looks the most fragile 😄 

we could try what Apache Foundation does: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M91jraoo6t8

## Governance Board (GB) members

You can determine who are the current GB members by filtering the [maintainers](MAINTAINERS.yaml) and the [ambassadors](AMBASSADORS_MEMBERS.json) with the ìsBoardMember` set to `true`. We also transparently list all the GB members in [AsyncAPI Website](`https://asyncapi.com/community/board`)

To become a GB member, you need to be a member of Technical Steering Committee (TSC). To become a member of TSC, you need to be either Ambassador or Maintainer. 

### Election of the Governance Board

Elections are conducted every 12 months. Initially, 3 board members will be elected. After a period of 12 months, two additional members will be elected. This cycle recurs every 24 months. The elections will serve to either re-elect incumbent members or appoint new individuals to the board.

- At least 60 days prior to elections, the Governance Board (GB) must invite the community to suggest candidates. It must be done through a blog post that will be promoted via the current AsyncAPI communication channels.
- People can also submit their application on their own. 

> - Information about candidate must be sent to info@asyncapi.io not later than 30 days before elections.

Reviewer 5: Why not keep it in GitHub?

Author: Because the candidate might disagree to be volunteered by someone, and therefore this should not be public imho, until validated. Public info from the start causes unnecessary pressure. 

There could also be some code of conduct concerns that should be solved "offline" with the CoC committee.

Author: @jonaslagoni makes sense? you think I should add a note with some explanation?

Reviewer 5: Think I skipped over the `invite the community to suggest candidates` i.e. others may suggest you 🤔 Which I find kinda weird, but I can see cases where it's nice 😄

- TSC members are free to share publicly who they voted on.

#### Explanation of the Board Election and Term Cycle

Board Composition: The board consists of 5 members, each serving a term of 24 months.

Staggered Elections:

- Initial Year (Month 0): At the start, 3 members are elected. These members will serve for 24 months.
- 12 Months Later: After one year, the remaining 2 members are elected. These members will also serve for 24 months.

Continuous Cycle:

- After the initial 24 months, the terms of the first 3 members come to an end. These positions are up for re-election or reappointment.
- One year later (after the 24-months period of the second group ends), the positions of the remaining 2 members are up for re-election or reappointment.

This system ensures a staggered rotation of board members, maintaining continuity in governance while allowing periodic introduction of fresh perspectives.

#### Interim Election

> In the event that a board member's term is terminated prior to its scheduled end, the organization shall ensure that a replacement election is organized and completed within 60 days from the date of termination to fill the vacancy and maintain the full composition of the board.

Reviewer 4: How will the board function within this window?

Reviewer 4: Fair enough

## Governance Board (GB) members

You can determine who are the current GB members by filtering the [maintainers](MAINTAINERS.yaml) and the [ambassadors](AMBASSADORS_MEMBERS.json) with the ìsBoardMember` set to `true`. We also transparently list all the GB members in [AsyncAPI Website](`https://asyncapi.com/community/board`)

To become a GB member, you need to be a member of Technical Steering Committee (TSC). To become a member of TSC, you need to be either Ambassador or Maintainer. 

### Election of the Governance Board

> Election takes place every 12-months. First time 3 board members are elected, then after 12-months another 2 members are elected. Then again, since board members are elected for 24-months, we run election to reelect or pick new board members, and so on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Elections are conducted every 12 months. Initially, 3 board members will be elected. After a period of 12 months, two additional members will be elected. This cycle recurs every 24 months. The elections will serve to either re-elect incumbent members or appoint new individuals to the board.
```

ChatGPT is good at this 😄

> - At least 60 days prior to elections, the Governance Board (GB) must invite the community to suggest candidates. It shoudl be done through a blog post that will be promoted via the current AsyncAPI communication channels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- At least 60 days prior to elections, the Governance Board (GB) must invite the community to suggest candidates. It should be done through a blog post that will be promoted via the current AsyncAPI communication channels.
```

Reviewer: Should or Must? 🤔

Reviewer: Anyway, pick your favourite.

```suggestion
- At least 60 days prior to elections, the Governance Board (GB) must invite the community to suggest candidates. It must be done through a blog post that will be promoted via the current AsyncAPI communication channels.
```

- People can also submit their application on their own. 
- Information about candidate must be sent to info@asyncapi.io not later than 30 days before elections.
- Nominee must agree to be nominated.
- List of candidates must be published at least on AsyncAPI Website not later than 2 weeks before elections.
- Concerns about candidates should be reported to Code of Conduct Committee. 

GB calls out for voting by presenting the candidates and instructing how people should vote. Voting is private because we need to respect candidates and possible issues related to public rejection. Candidates know their results. Only winners and their votes are presented to public.

> TSC members are free to share publicly who they voted on.

Reviewer: Some of these paragraphs are bullet points and others aren't. I think formatting got lost at some point.

#### Explanation of the Board Election and Term Cycle

Board Composition: The board consists of 5 members, each serving a term of 24 months.

Staggered Elections:

- Initial Year (Month 0): At the start, 3 members are elected. These members will serve for 24 months.
- 12 Months Later: After one year, the remaining 2 members are elected. These members will also serve for 24 months.

Continuous Cycle:

- After the initial 24 months, the terms of the first 3 members come to an end. These positions are up for re-election or reappointment.

> - One year later (after the 24-month period of the second group ends), the positions of the remaining 2 members are up for re-election or reappointment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- One year later (after the 24-months period of the second group ends), the positions of the remaining 2 members are up for re-election or reappointment.
```

Any maintainer and any ambassador can change their status by editing `isTSCMember` properties.

## Voting

TSC Voting process and all related rules are describe in detail in [voting procedure document](voting.md).

GB election voting is a separate manual process run by current GB members:
- Vote should be sent to info@asyncapi.io not later than two weeks after elections start
- Vote should be a list of candidates that voter want to be GB members. If there are 2 slots available, voter should send 2 names, if 3 then voter should send 3 names. We follow [first-past-the-post](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/First-past-the-post_voting) voting process. Candidates with the highest number of votes win.

## Past directors

We no longer have Executive Directors in the project

#### Fran Mendez

|                |                                    |
| -------------- | ---------------------------------- |
| Email          | fmvilas@gmail.com                  |
| AsyncAPI Slack | Fran Méndez (User ID: `U34F2JRRS`) |
| GitHub         | https://github.com/fmvilas         |
| Mastodon       | https://social.fmvilas.me/@fran    |

### Lukasz Gornicki

> The current Executive Director is Lukasz Gornicki.

Reviewer: If you're going to be listed under "Past directors" then this line doesn't make sense.
